Narrator: JUNE. AND SPRING
IN CANADA IS...
FULL BLOWN.
FOR BOYS, IT MEANS LIFE IS
ONE BIG PLAYING FIELD.
A TIME WHEN,
QUITE LITERALLY,
THEY'RE FLYING HIGH.
HUT.
ASK A BOY THE BEST PART?
HE CAN COUNT THE DAYS
TILL FREEDOM.
JUNE. THE LAST MONTH
OF SCHOOL.
Children: NO MORE RULERS,
NO MORE BOOKS,
NO MORE TEACHERS'
DIRTY LOOKS.
AS THIS SCHOOL YEAR
WINDS DOWN,
THE OBJECT OF
THE TEACHER'S DIRTY LOOK
IS NOT LIKELY THE GIRL
SITTING IN THE THIRD ROW
BUT THE BOY WHO'S
SITTING BESIDE HER.
I'M DAVID GRAY
IN CALGARY.
BOYS AND SCHOOLS
JUST DON'T ADD UP
FAR TOO OFTEN THESE DAYS.
THEY DON'T READ
AS WELL AS GIRLS,
THEY DON'T WRITE AS WELL
AND THEY'RE BEING
BEATEN OUT
FOR SPOTS IN OUR
UNIVERSITIES BY GIRLS.
THERE'S A PROBLEM
THESE DAYS WITH BOYS.
WE'RE NOT SAYING
THEY'RE BAD,
WE'RE NOT EVEN BLAMING BOYS.
BUT SOME THINGS
CAN'T GO UNNOTICED.
A STUDY RELEASED
IN 43 COUNTRIES
FOUND BOYS LAGGING
BEHIND GIRLS EVERYWHERE,
INCLUDING HERE IN CANADA.
THE GREATEST GAP--
READING AND WRITING.
I THINK GUYS CAN BE
JUST AS SMART AS GIRLS
IF GUYS JUST BUCKLED DOWN
AS MUCH AS THE GIRLS DID.
LIKE, WHAT'S MAKING
THE GIRLS DO SO MUCH BETTER?
THEY DOING LOTS OF HOMEWORK,
THEY GETTING EXTRA WORK.
WHAT ARE THEY DOING
THAT THE GUYS AREN'T DOING?
SO WHAT IS THE PROBLEM
WITH BOYS?
IT ALL STARTED OUT SO WELL.
LOTS OF INTERESTING
THINGS HAPPEN HERE.
NAME SIX KINDS
OF PLANTS.
I THINK WHAT WE HAVE
IN OUR HANDS HERE
IS A CLASSIC CASE OF
WHAT LAYMEN REFER TO AS
FEAR OF FAILURE.
AS A RESULT,
BART IS AN UNDERACHIEVER
AND YET HE SEEMS TO BE...
HOW SHOULD I PUT THIS?
PROUD OF IT.
HMM.
ONE OF HIS PROBLEMS MAY BE
HIS SHORT ATTENTION SPAN
WHICH CAN LEAD TO...
BLAH, BLAH, BLAH...
LOOK AT THESE RESULTS.
55, 42, 26.
A 12 ON STATE CAPITALS?
OKAY, OKAY.
WHY ARE WE DANCING
AROUND THE OBVIOUS?
I KNOW IT, YOU KNOW IT.
I AM DUMB, OKAY.
DUMB AS A POST.
THINK I'M HAPPY
ABOUT IT?
THERE, THERE, BART.
Kathleen: THIS IS
LESTER B. PEARSON
HIGH SCHOOL IN CALGARY.
HELLO, I'M KATHLEEN PETTY
AND THIS IS A
C.B.C. NEWS WORLD SPECIAL--
THE PROBLEM WITH BOYS.
THERE ARE 725 BOYS
THAT GO TO THIS SCHOOL
AND SOME OF THEM ARE
EXCELLING ACADEMICALLY.
OTHERS? WELL, THEY'RE NOT
MAKING THE GRADE
AND THIS IS TRUE OF
HIGH SCHOOLS
ACROSS THIS COUNTRY.
EDUCATORS ARE
NOTICING A TREND.
IT IS CALLED
UNDERACHIEVEMENT.
AND WE HAVE BROUGHT TOGETHER
A PANEL OF PEOPLE
WHO SPEND A CONSIDERABLE
AMOUNT OF TIME
EXAMINING WHY THIS TREND
IS HAPPENING.
I'D LIKE TO
INTRODUCE THEM TO YOU.
WILLIAM POLLACK
IS A CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGIST
AND PROFESSOR OF PSYCHIATRY
AT HARVARD MEDICAL SCHOOL.
ALSO THE AUTHOR OF
REAL BOYS.
HEATHER BLAIR'S
AN EDUCATION PROFESSOR
OF LANGUAGE AND LITERACY
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA.
JEAN-CLAUDE ST-AMANT
HAS RESEARCHED
THE EDUCATION GENDER GAP
FOR YEARS.
HE JOINS US FROM
LAVAL UNIVERSITY,
GOOD TO SEE YOU.
ANDREW NIKIFORUK
IS A FATHER OF THREE BOYS
AND A COMMENTATOR
ON EDUCATION ISSUES.
THANK YOU ALL FOR JOINING US,
APPRECIATE IT.
LET'S START BY
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
AND JEAN-CLAUDE, I'D LIKE TO
START WITH YOU ON THIS.
WHAT I'M CURIOUS TO KNOW
IS WHETHER BOYS
ARE DOING WORSE
COMPARED TO BOYS
OF PREVIOUS GENERATIONS
OR ARE BOYS DOING WORSE
COMPARED TO GIRLS
OF THIS GENERATION?
I THINK THAT'S
A GOOD QUESTION.
IF YOU COMPARE
BOYS WITH BOYS,
YOU'LL SEE THAT FROM
LET'S SAY THE 80's
UP TO NOW,
THE BOYS ARE FARING
A LOT BETTER
IN SCHOOL
THAN THEY WERE.
THIS IS TRUE
IN CANADA,
IN MOST
INDUSTRIALIZED
COUNTRIES.
BUT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
UNDERACHIEVEMENT
BECAUSE IN
THE SAME SITUATION,
GIRLS ARE FARING BETTER
ON TWO WAYS.
IN READING AND WRITING,
FOR ONE,
THAT'S ON SUBJECT MATTERS,
AND THE OTHER ONE WOULD BE
DROPPING OUT OF SCHOOL.
BOYS, EVEN WITH
THE SAME GRADES,
DROP OUT OF SCHOOL
A LOT EASIER
THAN GIRLS DO.
ALL RIGHT, SO,
WILLIAM POLLACK,
IF BOYS ACTUALLY
AREN'T DOING WORSE
THAN THEIR PREDECESSORS,
BUT THEY'RE DOING WORSE
COMPARED TO GIRLS
WHO, PRESUMABLY, ARE ACHIEVING
MORE THAN THEY ONCE DID,
WHY ARE WE CONCERNED?
WELL, FIRST OF ALL,
WE GET A CHANCE TO DISAGREE
AT THE OUTSET,
A LITTLE BIT.
CERTAINLY IN THE DATA
WE SEE IN THE STATES,
AND THAT WE SEE
IN OTHER PLACES,
BOYS ARE DOING A LITTLE
WORSE THAN THEY DID
TEN YEARS AGO
AND TWELVE YEARS AGO.
NOT EXCEEDINGLY WORSE,
BUT A LITTLE WORSE
AND CERTAINLY IN READING
AND IN WRITING.
AND THEY ARE DOING WORSE
COMPARED TO GIRLS.
PART OF THAT IS
GIRLS ACHIEVEMENT.
THAT'S WONDERFUL.
BUT PART OF IT IS
BOYS BEING TURNED OFF
BECAUSE OFTEN THE CURRICULUM,
THE CLASSROOM
DON'T MEET THEIR PARTICULAR
EDUCATIONAL NEEDS
OR THEIR BEHAVIORAL TEMPO.
OKAY, AND HEATHER,
DO YOU AGREE
WITH THAT ANALYSIS OF IT?
DO YOU AGREE THAT BOYS ARE
FALLING BEHIND OTHER BOYS?
WELL, I THINK THAT BOYS ARE
PERHAPS NOT DOING
THE KINDS OF THINGS
IN SCHOOLS
THAT WE WOULD, AS EDUCATORS,
LIKE TO SEE THEM DOING.
THEY'RE DOING A WHOLE
RANGE OF OTHER THINGS
AND BASED THEN ON--
WE'RE TESTING THEM
ON CERTAIN MEASURES
AND PERHAPS THOSE MEASURES
AREN'T ACTUALLY MEASURING
WHAT BOYS ARE DOING.
PERHAPS WE'RE MEASURING
WHAT THEY AREN'T DOING.
Kathleen: LIKE WHAT?
BUT WE'RE NOT GETTING OUT
WHAT THEY ARE DOING.
I WOULD SAY SOME OF THEIR
OTHER KINDS OF LITERACIES.
LITERACY--
THE WHOLE DEFINITION
OF LITERACY
HAS CHANGED.
LITERACY, TODAY,
IS NOT WHAT IT WAS
TEN YEARS AGO
OR TWENTY YEARS AGO.
IT'S NOT JUST
THE SAME KIND OF
READING AND WRITING
AS IT USED TO BE.
THERE ARE DIFFERENT THINGS
THAT COMPOSE LITERACY.
THE NEW LITERACIES,
INCLUDING DIGITAL LITERACY
SO I WOULD SAY, WHERE ARE
THE BOYS ON ALL OF THAT?
PERHAPS OUR TESTS
DON'T MEASURE THAT.
OKAY. ANDREW,
WHERE ARE YOUR BOYS?
BECAUSE YOU CLEARLY
NOTICED A PROBLEM.
THERE'S A LOT OF SCHOOL
CHOICE IN THIS PROVINCE
AND YOU'VE TAKEN
ADVANTAGE OF THAT.
WELL, I HAVE MY BOYS IN THREE
DIFFERENT SCHOOLS, ACTUALLY,
TO MEET THEIR NEEDS.
AND I THINK THEIR NEEDS
ARE BEING MET SUCCESSFULLY
IN THOSE THREE
DIFFERENT SCHOOLS.
ONE OF THEM IS
A SINGLE GENDER SCHOOL,
IT'S AN ALL BOYS SCHOOL.
BUT I THINK THAT
I CERTAINLY--
AS A FORMER TEACHER,
I MEAN, I--
THERE IS A PROBLEM
OUT THERE.
AND I THINK WHAT THE BOYS
ARE TELLING US
IS QUITE SIMPLY THIS.
THAT IF WE GIVE THEM
UNPREPARED TEACHERS
WHO AREN'T TRAINED
VERY WELL
AND THEN WE ADD
ON TOP OF THAT
TEXTBOOKS THAT ARE
POORLY DESIGNED,
AND THEN HAVE WAY TOO MUCH
LANGUAGE IN THEM,
PARTICULARLY IN OUR
MATH PROGRAMS,
UM, AND THEN WE GIVE THEM
LANGUAGE PROGRAMS THAT,
YOU KNOW, FOCUS ON FICTION
AND FOCUS ON WRITING
DIARIES AND JOURNALS,
WHICH WILL APPEAL
TO THE GIRLS
BUT NOT TO THE BOYS,
IT'S NO WONDER THAT WE SEE
A LOT OF ACTING OUT,
A LOT OF PROBLEMS
IN OUR SCHOOLS.
BUT HAS EDUCATION
REALLY CHANGED THAT MUCH?
THERE WERE LOTS
OF WOMEN TEACHING
WHEN I WAS THERE,
AND WE DID MANY OF THE THINGS
YOU JUST TALKED ABOUT
WHEN I WENT TO SCHOOL,
AND YET THIS IS A PROBLEM
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT TODAY.
HAS IT REALLY
CHANGED THAT MUCH?
OH, IT'S CHANGING
AND YOU KNOW,
I THINK WE HEARD
WONDERFULLY
HOW IT CAN
CHANGE POSITIVELY
TO HAVE NEW KINDS
OF LITERACY
BUT IN MANY WAYS,
THE CURRICULUM IS
WHAT WE CALL
BEING PUSHED DOWN.
WHAT YOU AND I LEARNED
IN KINDERGARTEN
WERE SOCIAL SKILLS.
BOYS AND GIRLS
ARE NOW BEING ASKED
TO READ AND WRITE
AT A LEVEL
THAT WE WOULD DO
IN SECOND AND THIRD GRADE.
SO IF THE TYPICAL BOY
ISN'T READING YET
IN KINDERGARTEN,
WE SAY THERE'S
SOMETHING WRONG WITH HIM.
HE'S GOT
POOR LITERACY.
WE'RE MAKING
DEMANDS OF THEM
AND OF GIRLS, TOO,
MUCH EARLIER.
THE GIRLS CAN
JUST GET BY.
IT'S NOT GREAT
FOR THEM, EITHER.
BUT THE BOYS START
TO FAIL VERY EARLY
AND THEN THEIR
SELF ESTEEM PLUMMETS
AND THEN THEY
START TO GIVE UP
ALMOST BY THE THIRD
OR FOURTH GRADE.
OKAY, SO DO GIRLS
HAVE NATURALLY
BETTER SELF ESTEEM?
IS IT INNATE IN A WAY
THAT IT ISN'T
WITH BOYS, JEAN-CLAUDE?
NO. FOR ONE THING,
IT'S NOT NATURAL.
THESE THINGS ARE TAUGHT,
THESE THINGS ARE LEARNED.
IT HAS NOT VERY MUCH
TO DO WITH BIOLOGY
OR BIOLOGY DOESN'T EXPLAIN
THE GENDER GAP SITUATION.
UH...
THE, UH...WAY
OF RAISING BOYS
TEND TO LEAD THEM AWAY
FROM SCHOOLS,
AND FROM
SCHOOL SUBJECTS
OR FROM WHAT IS TAUGHT
IN SCHOOL.
THEY HAVE LOTS OF INTERESTS
BUT THEIR INTEREST
DOESN'T MATCH VERY MUCH
WITH WHAT IS TAUGHT
IN SCHOOL--
Kathleen:
BUT DID IT USED TO?
DID IT EVER MATCH
WHAT THEIR INTERESTS WERE?
DID-- DID--
BUT IF YOU--
I THINK MORE ATTENTION
WAS ACTUALLY PAID
TO BOYS' INTERESTS
IN SCHOOLS
BACK WHEN SCHOOLS
WERE STILL--
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
THE ONE ROOM SCHOOLHOUSE,
WHERE BOYS WOULD
BE READING--
THEY WOULD BE READING
BIOGRAPHIES
OF GREAT MEN AND HEROES,
THEY'D BE READING
LOTS OF SCIENCE
AND SCIENCE FICTION.
AND TODAY, THERE'S
THE EXPECTATION THAT,
NO, YOU GOTTA READ
THE FICTION HERE,
AND YOU GOTTA PUT
AN ENTRY IN YOUR DIARY
AND THAT'S JUST NOT
GONNA APPEAL TO A GUY.
THAT'S FEMINIZATION,
THAT'S WHAT YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT.
Andrew:
THAT'S FEMINIZATION,
IN A WAY, YEAH.
BUT--BUT-- THAT'S AN
OVER SIMPLIFICATION OF,
I THINK, WHAT'S GOING ON.
I THINK WHAT'S GOING ON
IS JUST SOME
REALLY BAD DESIGN
AND BAD PROGRAMMING
BY PEOPLE WHO RUN
OUR SCHOOLS.
Heather: I THINK
THAT WE DO NEED TO
BE CAREFUL, THOUGH,
ABOUT IT'S JUST
MORE BOY BOOKS
OR MORE NON FICTION
IS GOING TO SOLVE
SOME PROBLEM.
I THINK IT'S WAY
BIGGER THAN THAT
AND MORE COMPLEX
THAN THAT
AND I WOULD BE AFRAID
IF WE STARTED TO BUY--
JUST SIMPLE-- YOU KNOW,
A FEW MORE BOOKS
WILL SOLVE THE PROBLEM.
THE RIGHT KINDS OF BOOKS
OR MAYBE NOT A DIARY
BUT SOME OTHER KIND OF
WRITING EXERCISE.
I THINK WE NEED TO LOOK
MORE COMPREHENSIVELY
AT WHAT LITERACY IS.
Kathleen: MM-HMM.
AND I THINK THERE IS
SOMETHING WE CALL
THE BOY CODE.
BOYS ARE TAUGHT,
BEFORE THEY EVER
GET TO SCHOOL,
TO SHUT UP, STAND ON
THEIR OWN TWO FEET,
AND NOT COMPLAIN.
SO PART OF WHAT'S GOING ON
IS THAT WHEN THEY COME
INTO A CURRICULUM
THAT MAY NOT BE FLEXIBLE
OR MAY NOT FIT FOR THEM,
THEY DON'T SAY, "PLEASE
HELP ME OUT, TEACHER."
OR "LET'S HAVE
A HEART TO HEART
INTERPERSONAL
DISCUSSION."
WHAT DO THEY DO?
THEY ACT OUT.
THEY BECOME
DISCIPLINE PROBLEMS.
AND THEN THE TEACHERS HAVE
NEGATIVE FEELINGS TOWARD THEM,
THEY HAVE NEGATIVE FEELINGS
TOWARD THE TEACHERS,
TOWARD THEMSELVES.
IT'S NO ONE'S FAULT.
WE SHOULDN'T DEMONIZE ANYONE
AND IT'S NOT
A WIN-LOSE SITUATION.
BUT I THINK THINGS
ARE SHIFTING IN THE WORLD
BUT THE WAY WE SOCIALIZE BOYS
TO DEAL WITH THE WORLD
HAS NOT SHIFTED ENOUGH.
IT'S BETTER TO BE
AN ACHIEVING,
INTELLIGENT GIRL...
THAN IT IS TO BE
A PRETTY GIRL
THAT HAS NO BRAINS.
YEAH. AND WHEREAS
WITH BOYS,
IF THEY SEEM
TOO INTELLIGENT,
THEY USUALLY GET,
LIKE, TERRORIZED BY
THEIR FRIENDS FOR BEING--
NERDS.
NERDS, SPODS, UNCOOL.
YOU KNOW?
Boy: NO, NO, NO.
WELL, CLEARLY,
IT'S AN INTERNATIONAL ISSUE,
BUT IT'S ALSO
A NATIONAL ISSUE
AND A REAL SORE SPOT
IS QUEBEC.
36% OF BOYS THERE
DROP OUT OF HIGH SCHOOL.
MICHELLE, NOW,
WITH THREE BOYS
WHO NEARLY JOINED
THEIR RANKS.
AT 16, DWAYNE SMALL
HAS MOST OF HIS LIFE
AHEAD OF HIM.
A LIFE FULL OF CHOICES.
HE COULD STUDY
TO BECOME WHAT HE WANTS.
THERE'S ONE THING
GETTING IN THE WAY, THOUGH.
SCHOOL.
MY SIXTH GRADE TEACHER
PRETTY MUCH RUINED EVERYTHING.
Interviewer:
WHY IS THAT?
UH, JUST ALWAYS
PUTTING ME DOWN,
SAYING THAT I CAN'T
DO ANYTHING PROPERLY
SO I JUST GOT FED UP
WITH GOING TO SCHOOL
AND JUST DIDN'T
WANT TO GO BACK.
FIFTEEN YEAR OLD
THOMAS CAMPBELL
HAD A SIMILAR EXPERIENCE.
TWO YEARS AGO,
HE'D HAD ENOUGH OF SCHOOL.
READY TO DROP OUT.
IT WAS BECAUSE THERE WAS TOO
MANY STUDENTS IN THE CLASS,
I JUST COULDN'T WORK.
IT WAS TOO MUCH.
TOO MANY PEOPLE.
AND YOU WEREN'T--
I WAS AFRAID
TO ASK QUESTIONS.
DARCY LeBLANC THOUGHT ABOUT
DROPPING OUT, TOO.
Darcy: IT'S THE FACT THAT,
LIKE, WE DON'T FIT IN.
LIKE MANY BOYS, DARCY WAS
UNABLE TO EXPRESS HIMSELF,
TRAPPED IN A RIGID
SCHOOL SYSTEM
BUILT ON QUICK LEARNING.
A LOT OF MY FRIENDS,
ACTUALLY,
IN THAT SCHOOL.
WE ALL HAD PROBLEMS
BECAUSE THEIR CURRICULUM
WAS WAY TOO FAST FOR US.
THE WAY THEY TEACH,
THE WAY THEY, LIKE,
RESPECT YOU.
DOESN'T REALLY WORK
THAT WAY.
THREE BOYS.
ALL SHARING SIMILAR PROBLEMS
WITH THE WAY THE PRESENT
SCHOOL SYSTEM IS RUN.
WE ARE CONFRONTED
WITH A REAL PROBLEM
THAT BOYS ARE
DROPPING OUT FROM SCHOOL
MUCH MORE FREQUENTLY
THAN GIRLS.
GERMAIN DULAC
OF McGILL UNIVERSITY
HAS RESEARCHED MALE BEHAVIOR
FOR THE PAST 20 YEARS.
IN THAT TIME, HE'S SEEN
QUEBEC'S DROP OUT RATE
RISE STEADILY TO 36%.
MOST OF THOSE DROP OUTS
ARE BOYS.
DULAC DOESN'T FIND
THE TREND SURPRISING.
HE KNOWS A LOT ABOUT IT.
HE DROPPED OUT OF
HIGH SCHOOL HIMSELF.
BOYS MIGHT BE MORE
PHYSICAL THAN INTELLECTUAL.
HALF OF THEM HAVE
MAJOR DIFFICULTIES--
I THINK THIS IS PARTLY
CAUSED BY MALE CULTURE
THAT SAYS THAT YOU COULD
GO THROUGH LIFE
DOING BY YOUR HAND,
WORKING
AND BEING ABLE
TO EARN YOUR LIFE
WITHOUT GOING TO SCHOOL.
TWO OF THE THREE BOYS
WE SPOKE TO CONFIRMED THAT.
THEIR CAREER OBJECTIVES?
GET INTO AUTO MECHANICS.
AUTO MECHANICS.
IN QUEBEC, THE DROP OUT RATE
IS SUCH A PROBLEM,
THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
IS TAKING
ALL SORTS OF MEASURES
TO REVERSE IT.
( singing )
FROM A MUSICAL TOUR
THAT SINGS THE PROS
OF STAYING IN SCHOOL
TO MORE CONCRETE
INITIATIVES,
SUCH AS FINDING OUT WHY
BOYS ARE QUITTING SCHOOL.
ONE OF THE FIRST THING
I WANT TO DO
IS FIND WHAT IS OF
INTEREST TO THOSE BOYS.
PIERRE REID IS QUEBEC'S
EDUCATION MINISTER.
IF YOU HAVE
PROBLEMS READING,
YOU WILL HAVE PROBLEM
LEARNING ABOUT ANYTHING,
EXCEPT A FEW THINGS.
SO I WOULD REALLY LIKE TO
ACT AS SOON AS POSSIBLE
ON READING, IN TERMS OF
MAKING READING
MORE OF SOMETHING
THAT'S COOL.
IT'S NOT ALWAYS
THE CASE FOR BOYS.
BUT THE BOYS WE SPOKE TO
WERE COOL TO THAT.
THEY HAVE THEIR OWN IDEAS
ON HOW TO SOLVE THE PROBLEM.
IF THE TEACHERS
WOULD HAVE HELPED OUT MORE,
AND GAVE ME MORE TIME,
'CAUSE THEY PRETTY MUCH WANT
THEIR TIME TO THEMSELVES.
SMALLER CLASSROOMS.
AND SOME BETTER TEACHERS.
DEFINITELY.
THE TEACHERS,
THE CURRICULUM...
IT MAY SEEM EASY TO PUT
THE BLAME ON SOMEONE ELSE
BUT RESEARCHERS SAY UNTIL
A REAL SOLUTION IS FOUND,
MANY BOYS WILL BE
LEFT ON THE OUTSIDE,
LOOKING IN.
WELL, THOSE THREE BOYS
ARE NOW ATTENDING
A SPECIAL SCHOOL
THAT HELPS BOYS
WHO WANT TO DROP OUT
AND THEY HAVE A HIGH SCHOOL
DIPLOMA IN THEIR SIGHTS.
SO, WHAT CAN SCHOOLS
AND TEACHERS
DO DIFFERENTLY TO HELP BOYS
BUY IN TO LEARNING?
WE GET BACK TO
OUR DISCUSSION
TO TALK ABOUT THAT
AND ANDREW,
I'D LIKE TO START
WITH YOU ON THIS
BECAUSE YOU HAVE TO
FACE THAT CHALLENGE
IN A VERY UP CLOSE
AND PERSONAL WAY.
HOW DID YOU DO IT?
Andrew: WELL, I THINK...
THE REALLY IMPORTANT
THING IS TO GET
THE READING AND THE WRITING
DONE PROPERLY.
AND THAT'S A DIFFICULT
THING TO DO.
AND WE DON'T TRAIN
TEACHERS WELL ENOUGH,
I MEAN, MOST OF OUR TEACHERS
KNOW ONLY ONE APPROACH.
THEY SHOULD PROBABLY KNOW
THREE OR FOUR APPROACHES.
IS IT JUST THE TEACHERS
OR IS IT THE STRUCTURE,
ALSO, OF MOST SCHOOLS?
WELL, IT'S
A COMBINATION.
I MEAN-- THE-- IT--
YOU KNOW, THE MOST IMPORTANT
THING IS THE TEACHER
AND IF THE TEACHER DOESN'T
KNOW HOW TO TEACH READING,
AND MOST FACULTIES
OF EDUCATION
DO NOT TEACH
THEIR TEACHERS
HOW TO TEACH READING,
PARTICULARLY A DIVERSE
GROUP OF KIDS,
SO YOU'VE GOT, YOU KNOW,
CHILDREN WITH ENGLISH
AS A SECOND LANGUAGE,
YOU'VE GOT ABORIGINAL KIDS,
YOU'VE GOT POOR KIDS,
YOU'VE GOT THE WHOLE MIX,
AND IF YOU DON'T
HAVE THOSE SKILLS,
THEN YOU'RE GONNA HAVE
A LOT OF FRUSTRATED GUYS
ON YOUR HAND BY GRADE THREE
AND GRADE FOUR.
SO I'D SAY, NUMBER ONE, THAT
THAT'S CRITICALLY IMPORTANT.
TRAIN OUR TEACHERS,
GIVE THEM THE BEST TOOLS,
AND PARTICULARLY
IN THE EARLY GRADES.
OKAY, HEATHER,
ARE TEACHERS
JUST NOT GETTING IT?
WELL, I HAPPEN TO THINK
THAT WE'RE DOING
A REASONABLE JOB
PREPARING TEACHERS
BUT I DO THINK WE NEED
TO KNOW MORE ABOUT BOYS.
AND WE'RE OPERATING ON
SOME OLD UNDERSTANDINGS
AND MAYBE WE NEED TO TO--
THE KINDS OF RESEARCH
THAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
AND THE KINDS OF RESEARCH
WE'RE INVOLVED IN,
I THINK WE NEED MORE OF IT.
Kathleen: WHEN YOU SAY
OLD UNDERSTANDINGS,
IS THAT TO SAY IT'S NOT
THAT BOYS HAVE CHANGED,
WE'VE JUST NEVER BOTHERED
TO REALLY EXAMINE
WHO AND WHAT THEY ARE,
JEAN-CLAUDE?
BOYS EXISTING AS A GENDER
IS VERY RECENT.
UH, 10 YEARS AGO,
ONLY WOMEN WERE THE--
THE GENDER QUESTION.
SO NOW THERE ARE
NEW QUESTIONS RAISED
AND A FOCUS MORE ON BOYS
AND WE'VE DONE RESEARCH
COMPARING BOYS AS SUCH
AND COMPARING BOYS
WITH GIRLS
AND FOR INSTANCE,
BOYS THAT HAVE SUCCESS
IN SCHOOL
AND GIRLS THAT HAVE
SUCCESS IN SCHOOL,
DO THE SAME THINGS.
THE PERCEIVE THE SCHOOL
THE SAME WAY,
THEY INVEST THEMSELVES
AND THEY'RE VERY,
VERY SIMILAR
IN THE WAY THEY DO.
OKAY, WILLIAM?
THAT MAKES SENSE
BUT FOR THE BOYS
WHO AREN'T THAT WAY,
WE HAVE TO HAVE
A MORE BREADTH
OF WHAT THE SCHOOL
CAN BE LIKE.
BOYS, NOT NECESSARILY
BECAUSE OF BIOLOGY,
ARE MORE ACTION ORIENTED.
THEY LIKE STORY PLOTS,
LIKE DOING THINGS
WITH THEIR HANDS.
THEY DON'T HAVE
TO BE MECHANICS.
THEY CAN BE
USING COMPUTERS,
USING VIDEO PIECES,
USING ALL KINDS
OF NEW TECHNIQUES
AND TEACHERS NEED TO
EXPAND THOSE TECHNIQUES
SO THE BOYS
REMAIN INTERESTED--
BUT DO YOU DIVIDE
THE CLASS THEN?
DO YOU HAVE A CLASS
WHERE BOYS ARE TAUGHT--
NO, NOT BY BOY
AND GIRL.
--AND TAUGHT DIFFERENTLY?
NOT BY BOY AND GIRL
BUT BY INTEREST.
YOU SEE, WHEN YOU INTRODUCE
THAT RANGE OF INTERESTS,
A WHOLE BUNCH OF GIRLS
WHO NEVER THOUGHT THEY KNEW IT
COME OVER TO THAT
INTEREST AS WELL.
AND YOU EXPAND IT
AND IT DOESN'T BECOME
BOY VERSUS GIRL,
IT BECOMES BOY AND GIRL.
JEAN-CLAUDE?
AND WE WERE TALKING
ABOUT THAT A WHILE AGO.
VARIETY DOESN'T
STOP AT TWO.
WE NEED A VARIETY
OF APPROACHES
TO REACH A VARIETY
OF INTELLIGENCES
WHICH ARE NOT NECESSARILY
BOYS AND GIRLS.
THERE IS A VARIETY
OF WAYS OF LEARNING
AND WHEN
THE APPROACHES ARE...
MORE, UH...
VARIED, THEN YOU'LL
REACH A LOT MORE PEOPLE.
AND THEN DO YOU PREVENT
THAT NOTION OF A GENDER WAR?
BECAUSE I KNOW
ALL OF YOU AGREE
THAT IS ONE OF THE DANGERS
OF THIS DISCUSSION.
NOT THAT WE SHOULDN'T
HAVE IT,
BUT THAT THAT MIGHT BE
WHAT IT LEADS TO. ANDREW?
I-- I THINK
WE'VE ALWAYS KNOWN
THAT THE BOYS ARE
A LITTLE BIT DIFFERENT
AND WE ALSO KNOW THAT WE--
FOR, YOU KNOW-- THE--
IT'S NO SURPRISE
THAT THEY HAVE PROBLEMS
LEARNING HOW
TO READ AND WRITE.
I-- I, MYSELF,
HAD THOSE PROBLEMS
AND I DIDN'T GO AROUND
TELLING PEOPLE,
"CAN YOU PLEASE
HELP ME LEARN TO READ?"
NOW YOU'RE A JOURNALIST--
NO, NO.
I REMEMBER WHEN I WAS
IN GRADE THREE,
I WENT OUT TO THE YARD
AND I SLUGGED SOMEBODY.
SO IT TOOK A WHILE TO--
FOR THEM TO PUT ALL
THE PIECES TOGETHER.
BUT-- BUT-- YOU KNOW,
BUT WHAT WE'VE FORGOTTEN
IS THAT WHAT BOYS NEED IS
THEY NEED A LITTLE MORE
DIRECT INSTRUCTION,
ACTIVITY IN THE CLASSROOM.
THEY NEED SHORTER TIME
PERIODS TO DO THINGS.
NOT LONG-- THEY DON'T
NEED LONG EXPLANATIONS,
THEY NEED SHORT ONES.
AND I CAN SEE HEATHER
ITCHING TO GET IN HERE.
Andrew: WE'VE FORGOTTEN
SOME OF THOSE BASICS.
Heather: WE DO NEED
TO REMEMBER, THOUGH,
THAT NOT ALL BOYS
ARE THE SAME
AND NOT TO
ESSENTIALIZE BOYS.
THERE ARE BOYS IN MY RESEARCH
PROJECT, FOR EXAMPLE,
WHO READ VORACIOUSLY
AND HAVE SINCE
THEY STARTED SCHOOL.
THERE ARE BOYS WHO READ
PRIMARILY NON FICTION.
I MEAN, THEY COME IN
VERY MANY DIFFERENT
KINDS OF CONSTRUCTS.
William: IN FACT,
THAT'S ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT'S CHANGING.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO BE
ONE WAY TO BE A BOY.
BUT IF YOU'RE
THE KIND OF WAY
THAT DOESN'T FIT IN
TO THE VARIETIES
WE PRESENTLY HAVE,
WE HAVE TO EXPAND
THOSE VARIETIES.
THE AVERAGE--
THE AVERAGE BOY,
UP TO THE FIFTH
OR SIXTH GRADE,
COULD USE SIX
OR SEVEN RECESSES A DAY.
AND WHAT DOES HE GET?
WE HAVEN'T TALKED ABOUT
BEHAVIORAL TEMPO.
Kathleen:
HEY, I'D TAKE THAT.
WELL, YEAH.
BUT WHAT DOES HE GET
IF HE SQUIRMS
IN HIS SEAT?
WE TAKE AWAY
HIS RECESS.
THEN WE TELL HIM
HE HAS HYPER ACTIVITY
AND WE GIVE HIM RITALIN.
WE DON'T-- YOU KNOW,
YOU HEARD THAT QUESTION.
I'D LIKE TO HEAR
WHAT THE BOYS FEEL
AND THINK AND LIKE.
THEY'RE DIAGNOSED WITH
ATTENTION DEFICIT DISORDER
FAR MORE THAN GIRLS DO.
William:
FOUR TO ONE IN THE STATES,
SOME PLACES, TEN TO ONE.
Kathleen: IS THAT
APPROXIMATELY
WHAT IT IS HERE?
Jean-Claude:
APPROXIMATELY.
YEAH, YEAH.
YEAH, NO, CLEARLY,
THAT'S A PROBLEM.
BUT WE HAVE TO HEAR
WHAT THEY HAVE TO SAY
AND THAT'S WHY
OUR STUDY WAS CALLED
"LISTENING TO
BOYS' VOICES."
A WHOLE RANGE
OF THOSE VOICES,
WHOLE RANGE OF ETHNICITY,
BUT SEEING THEM
AS A WIDE GROUP
WHO CAN ACTUALLY
TELL US SOMETHING
EVEN THOUGH
THEY MIGHT NOT TALK
IN THE SAME KIND OF WAY
THAT GIRLS SPEAK TO US.
HOW MANY BOYS DO YOU KNOW
WHO WOULD GIVE UP
SKATEBOARDING
OR VIDEO GAMES TO CURL UP
WITH A GOOD BOOK?
NOT MANY? NO SURPRISE.
OH, FOR PETE'S SAKE,
WHAT HAVE YOU BASTARDS
DONE NOW?
HEY, THAT WAS KYLE
THAT WENT NUMBER TWO
IN THE URINAL.
NO, IT WASN'T,
FAT ASS.
I SAW YOU DO IT.
NOW THAT IS SPUNK
AND POP CULTURE'S GOT IT.
YOU, YOU, YOU AND YOU.
SOUTH PARK SERVES UP
SAUCY SATIRE
AND STARS SOME
GRADE SCHOOL TOONS
WITH TONS OF 'TUDE.
( screaming )
I GIVE THIS BOOK A NINE.
IN THE SIMPSONS,
THE MAIN MEN
ARE INTELLECTUALLY CHALLENGED
CARTOON BUFFOONS.
OH!
YOU KNOW WHO WE SHOULD GET
TO COACH BOBBY'S TEAM?
KING OF THEHILL'S
HANK AND HIS BEER DRINKING BUDS
ARE JUST GOOD OL' BOYS.
( cheering )
ONE THING THESE SHOWS
HAVE IN COMMON
IS THAT THE MALE CHARACTERS
ARE PORTRAYED
AS UNDER ACHIEVING
ANTIHEROS.
LIKE IT OR NOT, THIS KIND
OF STUFF IS BIG WITH BOYS.
BRASH T.V. SHOWS,
ACTION PACKED COMPUTER GAMES,
RISQUE VIDEOS.
THAT'S WHAT'S COOL
IN GRADE SCHOOL.
* MONEY MAKE THE WORLD
GO ROUND *
* SO LET'S GET MORE
* IT'S TIME
TO SHOW THESE PLAYERS *
* HOW IT SHOULD BE DONE
* YOU GOT PIMP POTENTIAL,
YOU MIGHT COULD BE ONE *
50 CENT, EMINEM.
BLINK 182.
THESE MAESTROS OF POP
ARE A HUGE INFLUENCE ON BOYS.
THEY ARE IDOLS AND ICONS
FOR KIDS LEARNING ABOUT LIFE.
* LET'S GO
MY NAME'S
GEORGE STROUMBOULOPOLOS--
THIS POP COMMENTATOR
IS A MUCH MUSIC VJ
VERY POPULAR WITH TEENS.
WHAT IS ACTUALLY
THE MESSAGE
THAT THESE YOUNG BOYS
ARE GETTING
OUT OF POP CULTURE?
WHAT THEY SEE IS
I CAME FROM NOTHING,
AND I BECAME SOMETHING.
* LOVE YOU, SNOOP DOGG
* YEAH, I LOVE YOU, TOO
* G U IN THE HIZZY
I THINK THERE'S
A LOT OF THAT,
IT'S THE FANTASY
LIFESTYLE.
UH, YOU KNOW,
ROCK AND ROLL BANDS
AND METAL BANDS
DID THE WHOLE SEX, DRUGS,
ROCK AND ROLL THING.
IT WAS
AN ASPIRATIONAL LIFESTYLE
YOU WANT TO GET TO.
AND SO I THINK
WHAT HAPPENS IS
PEOPLE ARE SEEING
THE IDEA OF ACHIEVEMENT.
BUT UNFORTUNATELY,
THE ACHIEVEMENT ISN'T
THROUGH EDUCATION.
HOW IS EDUCATION
PORTRAYED
TO YOUNG BOYS
IN POP CULTURE?
SOMETIMES, I DON'T THINK
IT'S PORTRAYED VERY WELL.
YOU DON'T SEE
VERY MANY MUSICIANS
RAPPING ABOUT
THEIR SECOND YEAR
OF LAW SCHOOL, YOU KNOW.
OR-- OR WHAT THEY WERE LIKE
WRITING THEIR THESIS.
YOU DON'T GET
A LOT OF THAT.
* BABY, THIS IS SIMPLE
* YOU CAN'T SEE
THE MESSAGE OF MOST
POP MUSIC?
WELL, CHECK IT OUT YOURSELF.
* WHAT YOU HEARD ABOUT ME
* BUT YOU CAN'T
GET A DOLLAR OUT OF ME *
* NO CADILLAC, NO PERMS,
YOU CAN'T SEE *
* I'M A P.I.M.P.
BUT THERE ARE
OTHER MESSAGES TOO.
JACKASS IS ONE OF MTV'S HITS.
IT'S ALL ABOUT GUYS
DOING DUMB STUNTS.
IT'S PART OF A TREND
THAT THIS FILMMAKER CALLS
STUPIDITY CULTURE.
I THINK THAT, UH,
WE LIVE IN A WORLD NOW
WHERE YOU HAVE A MODERN
STUPIDITY CULTURE.
I WAS STUPID--
STUPID.
WHICH PUTS A VALUE
OR MAKES LIKE
STUPID STUFF COOL.
THE BEST EXAMPLE
IS JACKASS OR STEVE-O.
STEVE-O AND JACKASS
PLAYED QUEBEC
AND MAYBE OTHER PARTS
OF CANADA.
THEY OFTEN
HAD ALL AGES SHOWS
'CAUSE THEY KNEW THAT
A BIG PART OF THEIR AUDIENCE
WAS LESS THAN DRINKING AGE.
SO I FIND THE DEMOGRAPHIC
IS EXACTLY THE KIDS
THAT ARE IN SCHOOL.
MEANING, YOU KNOW,
ANYWHERE IN BETWEEN,
LIKE 10 AND 18.
SO IT'S SCHOOL KIDS
WHO LOVE JACKASS
AND STEVE-O,
WHICH IS THE HEIGHT OF
ANTI INTELLECTUAL
ACHIEVEMENT.
AFTER SCHOOL, BOYS ARE
PLAYING LOTS OF VIDEO GAMES.
ABOUT 60% OF YOUNG LADS
IN GRADES THREE TO SIX
PLAY EVERY DAY.
Shelley: WHEN BOYS ARE
WATCHING TELEVISION
WHEN THEY'RE
WATCHING VIDEOS
OR WHATEVER IT IS,
WHATEVER
POP CULTURE FORMS,
THEY'RE SEEING
THE STEREOTYPES,
THEY'RE NOT SEEING
THE NUANCES
OF WHAT IT MEANS
TO BE BOY.
A LOT OF IMAGES
OF BOYS IN POP CULTURE
ARE ONES WHERE THEY'RE
WITH OTHER PEOPLE,
OFTEN BOYS,
AND THEY'RE DOING
A LOT OF ACTIVE KINDS
OF THINGS WHERE--
AND READING DOESN'T
REALLY FIT IN TO THAT.
WHO ARE THE ROLE MODELS
FOR YOUNG CATS THESE DAYS?
WELL, IT USED
TO BE ASTRONAUTS.
YOU KNOW, IT USED
TO BE A FIREMAN
AND NOW I THINK
IT IS AMAZING
THAT IF YOU LOOK
AT STEVE-O,
PEOPLE ARE IN LOVE
WITH THE GUY.
HE IS A TREMENDOUS
ROLE MODEL TO YOUNG PEOPLE.
THEY REALLY LOVE HIM.
SO IS STUPID CULTURE
AND BY EXTENSION,
POP CULTURE,
LETTING DOWN
YOUNG BOYS THEN?
POP CULTURE IS TURNING
YOUNG BOYS INTO MORONS.
WELL, MORONS
SEEMS A BIT HARSH,
BUT MORONIC ANTICS,
MORONIC ROLE MODELS?
PERHAPS.
SO HOW DO SCHOOLS
COMPETE WITH THAT?
HOW DO PARENTS HELP SCHOOLS
WE'VE TALKED A LOT
ABOUT WHAT SCHOOLS CAN DO
TO HELP BOYS LEARN BETTER.
WHAT CAN PARENTS DO?
AND ANDREW,
IT MAKES SENSE TO START
WITH OUR FATHER
OF THREE BOYS.
WELL, THEN, YOU HAVE TO
PROVIDE SOME STANDARDS
FOR YOUR BOYS.
AND YOU HAVE TO SAY,
YOU KNOW,
"GUYS, THAT IS
MORONIC STUFF"
AND WE'RE NOT GONNA BRING
VERY MUCH OF IT
INTO THE HOUSE
AND WHAT WE DO BRING
INTO THE HOUSE,
WE'LL SIT
AND CRITIQUE AND JUDGE
AND SO THAT'S NOT
WHERE WE WANT TO GO.
Kathleen:
AND BE A ROLE MODEL?
WELL, AND BE A ROLE MODEL,
BUT ALSO TO-- I MEAN,
I TRY FOR MY BOYS
TO GIVE THEM
OTHER EXAMPLES THAT--
OF-- OF--
OF MEN WHO I FEEL
ARE NOBLE
AND DOING GOOD THINGS.
WHETHER IT'S SOMEONE LIKE
ARAGORN IN LORD OF THE RINGS
OR WHETHER IT'S HECTOR
IN THE ILIAD.
UM, AND WE DISCUSS A LOT
OF GREEK MYTHOLOGY
IN OUR HOUSEHOLD BECAUSE
IN A LOT OF THIS MYTHOLOGY,
YOU FIND FINE EXAMPLES
OF MEN DOING NOBLE THINGS.
AND I DON'T FEEL I CAN
GIVE MY KIDS ENOUGH OF THAT.
AND I ALSO--
YOU'RE NOT NOBLE ENOUGH
TO DO THAT,
IS THAT WHAT
YOU'RE SAYING?
THERE'S SO MANY RICH
EXAMPLES TO GIVE THEM.
THAT'S WHAT I WANT
TO GIVE THEM.
AND THEN PUT LIMITS ON ALL
THE TECHNOLOGICAL
GARBAGE OUT THERE.
THERE'S NO SHORTAGE OF IT.
Kathleen: OKAY.
AND SCHOOLS I DON'T
THINK DO A GOOD
ENOUGH JOB, EITHER.
I MEAN, THEY'VE LET
THE POP CULTURE
INVADE THE SCHOOL
AND LET THAT
SIBLING CULTURE
SORT OF TAKE OVER.
OKAY, WILLIAM.
William: FIRST OF ALL,
I DON'T THINK
IT'S STUPIDITY.
I THINK IT'S
MASS MASCULINITY.
THIS IS WHAT MASCULINITY
AND BOY AND MALE CULTURE
IS ABOUT
AND BOYS ARE BEING
TAUGHT IT ON THE MEDIA.
IN THE RESEARCH
WE DID ON THE MEDIA,
BOYS SAID THAT THEY SAW MALES
AS BEING 95% OF THE TIME
AGGRESSIVE AND NEGATIVE.
THEIR OWN PEOPLE
IN SOME WAY.
WHAT CAN PARENTS DO?
PARENTS ARE--
OR ADULT CARETAKERS--
ARE THE MOST IMPORTANT
PEOPLE IN KIDS' LIVES.
PEER PRESSURE PALES
COMPARED TO
PARENTAL CONNECTION.
THE LARGEST STUDY
IN THE UNITED STATES.
ADOLESCENT HEALTH SHOWED
THAT IF THERE'S ONE PARENT
IN THE HOUSEHOLD
CONNECTED TO THE BOY,
HE'S TWO TIMES MORE LIKELY
TO BE PROTECTED
FROM THAT HARM.
IF HE'S LOVED,
FOUR TIMES MORE LIKELY.
JEAN-CLAUDE.
YES.
AND THE DEMOCRATIC
COMMUNICATION
WITH CHILDREN, TOO.
IF YOU ARE--
IF YOU IMPOSE TOO MUCH,
IT HAS A NEGATIVE IMPACT.
AND IF YOU LET
THEM GO TOO MUCH,
IT ALSO HAS
A NEGATIVE IMPACT.
YOU HAVE TO WORK
BETWEEN THE TWO.
NEGOTIATE.
Kathleen: WOW.
YES.
THAT SOUNDS
REALLY HARD.
AND BEING DEMOCRATIC
IN THE REAL SENSE,
YOU DO TAKE SOME ADVICE
FROM THEM.
YOU DO TAKE INFORMATION
FROM THEM
AND FROM THAT,
YOU COME AND ARRIVE
AT CERTAIN RULES
AND THEN EXPECT THESE RULES
TO BE RESPECTED.
Kathleen: YEAH.
Heather:
GIVING THEM CHOICE.
I MEAN, CHOICE IS
REALLY IMPORTANT,
WE CAN'T DOWNPLAY THAT.
I MEAN, KIDS AND BOYS--
Kathleen: AND THEY CAN
CHOOSE THAT.
WHAT WE WERE JUST WATCHING,
THEY CAN CHOOSE THAT.
Heather: THERE ARE LOTS
OF THINGS TO CHOOSE FROM.
THERE ARE SOME THINGS
THAT ARE BETTER
TO CHOOSE FROM
THAN OTHER THINGS.
SO GIVE THEM MORE
CHOICES TO CHOOSE FROM?
GIVE THEM CHOICES
AND LISTEN TO WHAT
THEY'RE SAYING ABOUT IT.
TALK TO THEM ABOUT
THE STUFF THEY'RE DOING.
THE BOYS IN OUR PROJECT
LOVE FUNNY STUFF.
I MEAN, IF SOMETHING'S FUNNY,
IT HOOKS THEM
AND THEY GO
OUT OF THEIR WAY
TO MAKE THINGS FUNNY.
THEY DO, WE CALL,
MORPHING THEIR LITERACY
BY BRINGING IN
SOME OF THEIR LITTLE
OUT OF SCHOOL
LITERACY PRACTICES
TO CREATE THE HUMOR
AROUND SOME OF
WHAT'S GOING ON
IN THE CLASSROOM,
'CAUSE THEY'RE NOT
THAT INTERESTED
IN SOME OF WHAT GOES ON
IN THE CLASSROOM.
SO LISTENING TO KIDS
AND GIVING THEM SOME CHOICES--
SO IT'S OKAY IF YOU
BASH YOUR HEAD
INTO A BUNCH OF
BOWLING PINS
AND LAUGH AT IT,
AS LONG AS THERE ARE
OTHER CHOICES BEYOND--
William: WELL, THERE
SHOULD BE OTHER CHOICES
AND YOU SHOULD BE
TALKING ABOUT IT
IN A SHAME FREE WAY
SO THEY'RE ALLOWED
TO NEGOTIATE
AND TALK WITH YOU
ABOUT WHAT HAPPENS
AND YOU CAN DO
ACTION, FUN THINGS
THAT AREN'T HURTFUL.
UM, BUT PARENTS,
TOO OFTEN FEEL
THAT WHEN A KID
BECOMES ADOLESCENT,
ESPECIALLY A BOY,
THEY HAVE TO
LEAVE HIM ALONE.
AND PARENTS SAY TO ME,
"WHAT'S THE WORST THING
WE CAN DO WITH
A MALE ADOLESCENT?"
I SAY, WHEN HE SAYS,
"LEAVE ME ALONE,"
TO ACTUALLY DO IT.
Kathleen: DID YOU LEAVE
YOUR BOYS ALONE?
YOU'RE NODDING.
NO, I MADE MY BOY--
ONE OF THEM IS
GOING THROUGH
ADOLESCENCE NOW.
I MEAN, WE'RE THERE
WITH HIM EVERY DAY.
I MEAN, HE STILL
GIVES US A HUG
BEFORE HE GOES TO BED
HEY. GOOD FOR YOU.
IT'S CONNECTION,
CONNECTION, CONNECTION.
THAT'S WHAT MAKES
THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN THE BOYS WHO ENGAGE
IN THOSE THINGS FOR REAL
AND THE ONES WHO KNOW
THAT IT'S JUST PLAY--
Kathleen: AND GIVE THEM NO
CHOICE ABOUT THE CONNECTION.
I MEAN, YOU HAVE TO IMPOSE
CONNECTION, SOMETIMES.
NOT IMPOSE,
BUT BE THERE FOR THEM.
HAIM GINOTT ONCE SAID TO
A PARENT OF AN ADOLESCENT,
"DON'T JUST DO SOMETHING.
BE THERE."
Kathleen: OKAY. JEAN-CLAUDE,
YOU'RE NODDING.
YES, YES,
I COMPLETELY AGREE.
AND I WOULD SAY
THAT THE--
OR IF I MAY ADD
THAT THE POP IMAGES
THAT ARE GIVEN TO GIRLS
ARE NOT TOO GOOD EITHER.
William: POSITIVE.
NOT TOO POSITIVE, EITHER.
THERE MAY BE DIFFERENT
BUT THERE IS WORK
TO BE DONE THERE
AND THERE'S EDUCATION
TO BE DONE THERE, ALSO.
I'D LOVE TO SEE--
AS PARENTS--
I'D LOVE TO SEE
BOYS AND GIRLS
AND BOYS' PARENTS
AND GIRLS' PARENTS
UNITE, TOGETHER,
TO DEAL WITH THIS
POPULAR CULTURE
IN SOME WAY.
OKAY, THERE'S ALWAYS
STRENGTH IN NUMBERS.
I'M ALL FOR THAT.
I DON'T SEE THIS
AS AN EXAMPLE
OF MASCULINE
BEHAVIOR.
I SEE MORE
AS AN EXAMPLE--
THIS IS THE KIND
OF BEHAVIOR YOU GET
WHEN-- WHEN-- WHEN--
WHEN THERE ARE NO PARENTS.
BUT IT APPEALS--
BUT IT APPEALS TO BOYS.
WOULDN'T YOU THINK THAT
APPEALS TO BOYS, THOUGH,
MORE THAN GIRLS?
Andrew: WELL, OF COURSE
IT APPEALS TO BOYS,
BUT-- BUT-- I STILL
FEEL THAT IT'S NOT
William:
NOT MASCULINE BEHAVIOR.
I DIDN'T SAY IT WAS
MASCULINE BEHAVIOR.
I SAID THIS IS
MASS PRODUCTION
OF MASCULINE BEHAVIOR.
THIS IS WHAT
THE MEDIA SHOWS US
MEN ARE LIKE.
OR WHAT THE MEDIA
THINKS MEN ARE LIKE.
Kathleen:
YEAH. I THINK THAT'S--
BUT I... BUT--
YEAH.
AS ADULTS DISCUSS
THE PROBLEM,
BOYS LIVE THE PROBLEM,
SO THE C.B.C.'s DAVID GRAY
SAT DOWN WITH
THREE OF THEM
TO GET THEIR TAKE.
DO YOU GUYS THINK
THERE'S A PROBLEM
WITH GUYS?
THE WAY GUYS ARE LEARNING?
IS THERE A PROBLEM RIGHT NOW?
Will: I DON'T THINK
THERE'S A PROBLEM
WITH THE WAY GUYS
ARE LEARNING, I JUST...
GIRLS ARE DEFINITELY--
I'VE NOTICED A LOT OF GIRLS
ARE JUST GENERALLY SMARTER
THAN MOST GUYS.
I DON'T KNOW.
Jeff:
I DON'T THINK SO.
I THINK-- I KNOW--
THERE'S GIRLS THAT WILL SIT
AND TAKE NOTES ALL CLASS
AND I COULD STILL
PULL MORE OUT OF IT
WHEN I DIDN'T EVEN WRITE
A SINGLE NOTE, YOU KNOW.
ONE OF IT IS FOLLOWING
A STRICT SYSTEM
OF GUIDELINES,
LIKE THEY'LL BE THERE
TO GET--
THEY'RE VERY, YOU KNOW...
THEY CAN STAY ON TOP,
FOLLOW--
GUYS, MAYBE, ARE MORE UP
AND DOWN, YOU KNOW.
WHERE THE INTELLECT'S THERE
BUT MAYBE SOMETIMES
THE DRIVE IS NOT.
YOU'RE ALL SMART GUYS,
CLEARLY, YOU KNOW.
I MEAN, NONE OF YOU...
IT'S NOT THAT YOU
CAN'T DO THIS STUFF.
AND YOU KNOW WHAT?
THE GIRLS ARE DOING IT.
FOR THE MOST PART, YOU LOOK
AT THE MARKS OF GIRLS,
YOU LOOK ACROSS THE BOARD,
THEY'RE DOING FINE, YOU KNOW?
THEY'RE MOVING AHEAD.
WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE?
WHY AREN'T GUYS...
Jeff:
DIFFERENT ENVIRONMENTS.
UM...
WHAT DO YOU MEAN?
LIKE... IT'S ALMOST
AGAINST, YOU KNOW,
THE MASCULINE NATURE
OF A GUY
TO SIT IN A CLASSROOM FOR
SIX HOURS A DAY, YOU KNOW.
THAT'S WHY THEY'RE ALWAYS
PLAYING HOCKEY,
OR, YOU KNOW,
SPORTS AND THAT.
THEY LEARN DIFFERENTLY
AND EVEN ONCE THEY GET
TO THE LABOR FORCE...
I MEAN, THEY TEND TO DO
LABOR INTENSIVE WORK.
IT'S PART OF THEIR--
IT'S PART OF THEIR,
YOU KNOW, THEIR NATURE.
LIKE, JUST BEING MASCULINE.
IT HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH,
YOU KNOW,
IT'S BETTER TO BE
MORE INVOLVED IN INTELLECT,
YOU KNOW, ORIENTATED WORK,
IT'S JUST--
THAT'S JUST THE WAY
IT TENDS TO GO.
Will: GUYS HAVE A LOT
OF THINGS ON THEIR MIND.
GUYS WORRY ABOUT CARS,
MAKING MONEY, GIRLS.
ALL SORTS OF THINGS
LIKE THAT.
I MEAN, I WORRY ABOUT
ALL THAT KIND
OF STUFF, RIGHT?
BUT I STILL WANNA GET
MY SCHOOLWORK DONE
AND HAVE GOOD MARKS.
BUT...
Jeff:
SOMETIMES INTERFERE.
MY MARKS ARE NOT BAD
AT ALL, RIGHT?
BUT WHEN I GO TO SCHOOL,
I DON'T REALLY...
I'D SAY I DON'T GIVE 100%
EVERY TIME I GO TO SCHOOL.
David: STATISTICS SHOW
THEY'RE BEATING YOU GUYS.
THE GIRLS ARE--
MORE OF THEM ARE
GOING TO UNIVERSITY.
WHAT ARE YOU GONNA DO
ABOUT THAT?
YOU TAKE THAT--
Jeff:
I WORK FOR THE LADIES.
THAT'S WHAT
WE'RE GONNA DO.
I THINK GUYS COULD BE
JUST AS SMART AS GIRLS,
IF GUYS JUST BUCKLED DOWN
AS MUCH AS THE GIRLS DID.
LIKE, WHAT'S MAKING
THE GIRLS DO SO MUCH BETTER?
THEY DOING LOTS OF HOMEWORK?
THEY GETTING EXTRA WORK?
WHAT ARE THEY--
WHAT ARE THEY DOING
THAT THE GUYS AREN'T DOING?
THAT'S THE ANSWER
I'M LOOKING FOR.
IT'S MOSTLY 'CAUSE THE GIRLS
ARE DRESSING BETTER
AND THE GUYS ARE IN CLASS
LOOKING AT THE GIRLS.
AND YOU CAN'T PAY ATTENTION
WHEN YOU GOT THIS GIRL
WEARING LIKE HARDLY
ANY CLOTHES.
David:
IT'S A CLOTHING--
IT'S A FASHION ISSUE,
YOU'RE TELLING ME.
Jeff: I THINK IT ALL
COMES DOWN TO...
YEAH, JUST TO
THE DRESS CODE,
BECAUSE...YOU KNOW,
I'D GET A LOT MORE DONE--
Roger: SO WHAT YOU'RE
SAYING IS YOU WANT
UNIFORMS IN SCHOOL.
Will: I THINK IT'S
A TEACHER-- I THINK
IT'S ABOUT THE TEACHERS.
I DON'T WANT UNIFORMS.
I WANT...
I WANT UNIFORMS,
BUT MINISKIRTS
FOR THE GIRLS.
Will: I THINK
THE TEACHERS...
TEACHERS, GENERALLY,
THEY...
THEY'RE MORE-- THEY CUT
THE GIRLS MORE SLACK.
I THINK SO A LOT.
I SERIOUSLY THINK SO.
I'VE NOTICED THAT IN CLASS.
Jeff: ESPECIALLY
THE MALE TEACHERS.
OH, LIKE, ALSO,
LIKE IN THE CLASSROOM,
I THINK THEY COULD...
'CAUSE WHEN A TEACHER'S,
LIKE, ALL MONOTONE,
AND JUST LIKE,
JUST STRAIGHTFORWARD...
I LIKE IT WHEN THEY'RE MORE,
LIKE, I DON'T KNOW, EXCITED,
'CAUSE IT GETS ME...
LIKE IT DRAWS ME
TOWARDS LEARNING
INSTEAD OF JUST LIKE,
ALL DULL AND WHATEVER.
AND LIKE, I GUESS
THE GIRLS CAN FOCUS MORE.
HAND ON STUFF MAKES ME
REMEMBER THINGS BETTER.
LIKE TAKING NOTES DOWN AND
EVERYTHING LIKE THAT...
IT'S TOO REPETITIVE.
BUT SAY YOU'RE IN
SOCIAL CLASS
AND YOU LEARN ABOUT NAPOLEON
AND STUFF LIKE THAT,
LOOKING AT PLAYS OR...
DOING THE PLAYS.
NOT NECESSARILY PLAYS,
BUT...
MOVIES ABOUT HIM
OR ACTING OUT ROLES,
THINGS LIKE THAT.
THAT'D BE PRETTY TIGHT.
WELL, SOME INSIGHTS
FROM THREE YOUNG MEN
WHO KNOW THE PROBLEM
UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL.
AND NOW FOR SOME
FINAL INSIGHTS
FROM OUR PANEL.
AS WE LOOK AHEAD TO THE IMPACT
ON SOCIETY AS A WHOLE
TO THE TREND THAT
WE'RE SEEING WITH BOYS,
THIS TREND
OF UNDERACHIEVEMENT,
AT LEAST AS THEY
COMPARE IT TO GIRLS,
WHAT DO YOU THINK
THE IMPACT WILL BE
IF IT ISN'T ADDRESSED?
WE CAN ARGUE ABOUT
HOW TO ADDRESS IT,
BUT WHAT HAPPENS
IF WE DON'T?
AND JEAN-CLAUDE,
I'D LIKE TO START WITH YOU.
WELL, I THINK THE MAIN
ISSUE IS ACCESS TO JOBS.
UH, MORE AND MORE
NEW JOBS ARE CREATED
NEED AT LEAST A SECONDARY
SCHOOL DIPLOMA
TO GET ACCESS TO.
EVEN EXISTING JOBS
OR PEOPLE THAT ARE ON
THE WORKING FORCE RIGHT NOW
WILL NEED TO GET
MORE EDUCATION,
OR CHANGE JOBS.
THEY WILL CHANGE JOBS
MORE OFTEN, ALL THAT,
AND THIS HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA
IS A BASIC NECESSITY
FOR THE JOBS COMING.
SO IT'S ACCESS
TO GOOD JOBS
THAT IS THE KEY POINT,
I WOULD SAY.
ALL RIGHT.
FROM THAT ON,
WE SHOULD
REMEMBER THAT...
GIRLS WITH
UNIVERSITY DIPLOMAS
GET JUST ABOUT
THE SAME SALARY
AS BOYS WITH
COLLEGE DIPLOMAS.
SO THE ACCESS TO JOBS,
I WOULD SAY,
IS THE MAIN THING AT STAKE.
Kathleen:
OKAY, HEATHER?
WELL, I'M NOT NEARLY
AS WORRIED
ABOUT BOYS IN THIS
AS SOME ARE.
I ACTUALLY THINK THE BOYS
ARE DOING QUITE WELL
IN A LOT OF WAYS,
AND I SAY THAT
WHEN I LOOK AT HOW
THEY'RE TEACHING
THEMSELVES IN A LOT OF WAYS
IN THE DIGITAL WORLD,
THE AMOUNT OF
READING THEY'RE DOING,
THE KIND OF READING
THEY'RE DOING ON THE INTERNET.
IT'S NOT WHAT WE THINK OF
AS READING
AS NOVELS AND THAT SORT
OF THING,
BUT THEY'RE FACT FINDING,
THEY CAN RESEARCH
AND I THINK THEY'RE
GONNA BE JUST FINE
WHEN IT COMES TO THOSE
KINDS OF JOBS.
I THINK THEY'RE
TEACHING THEMSELVES
AND THEY MAY BE
AHEAD OF THE GAME
AND MY QUESTION WOULD BE,
WHAT ABOUT THE GIRLS?
WHERE ARE THE GIRLS GONNA BE
IN THE DIGITAL DIVIDE?
OH, THAT MIGHT BE
OUR NEXT SPECIAL.
THAT'S NOT A BAD IDEA.
ANDREW?
WELL, I THINK WE HAVE
A CULTURAL PROBLEM
AND I THINK-- WE CAN SEE
THE EFFECTS OF IT.
AND THEY'VE BEEN AROUND
FOR A LONG TIME.
I MEAN, WE CAN LOOK
AT OUR JAILS
AND WE FIND THAT, YOU KNOW,
A HUGE POPULATION OF
YOUNG MALES IN OUR JAILS.
WHY? BECAUSE 70-80% OF THEM
CANNOT READ OR WRITE.
AND WE FIND THE SAME
PROBLEMS WITH OUR
ABORIGINAL KIDS.
AND WITH OUR
IMMIGRANT CHILDREN
WHO ARE FAILING
OUT OF SCHOOL
SO IF WE DO NOT
DEAL WITH IT,
WITH THE PROBLEM,
UH, THEN WE'LL PAY FOR IT
SOMEWHERE LATER
DOWN THE ROAD.
OKAY, WILLIAM POLLACK,
THE LAST WORD TO YOU.
I AM WORRIED
ABOUT THE BOYS.
I THINK WE ARE
ALREADY PAYING FOR IT.
I'M WORRIED ABOUT
THE GIRLS AS WELL.
IT'S NOT JUST BOYS,
IT'S BOYS AND GIRLS.
BUT BOYS WHO CAN'T DO
THOSE COMPLEX FUNCTIONS
FOR THOSE JOBS
WON'T GET THEM,
THEY'LL GET
ECONOMICALLY DEPRESSED,
OR THEY'LL GET
EMOTIONALLY DEPRESSED.
BETWEEN THE AGES
OF 10 AND 19,
BOYS ARE FOUR TIMES
MORE LIKELY
TO TAKE THEIR LIVES
THAN GIRLS ARE,
AND OVER THE LAST 20 YEARS,
THAT NUMBER HAS GONE UP 300%.
THIS IS NO SMALL MATTER.
NO. A CHILLING STATISTIC
TO END ON.
WILLIAM, HEATHER,
JEAN-CLAUDE, ANDREW,
THANK YOU ALL VERY MUCH.
I THINK REALLY A SUPERB
CONVERSATION.
I THANK YOU ALL
FOR TAKING THE TIME.
THANK YOU.
I'D ALSO LIKE TO THANK
THE STAFF, THE FACULTY,
THE STUDENTS AT LESTER B.
PEARSON HIGH SCHOOL.
WE VERY MUCH APPRECIATE
ALL OF THEIR ASSISTANCE.
THEY, TOO,
HAVE BEEN SUPERB.
AND OF COURSE WE WOULD LIKE
TO THANK YOU FOR WATCHING.
IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO WEIGH IN
ON THIS, OFFER YOUR VIEW,
THERE IS A WAY
YOU CAN DO IT. GO TO...
WE DO LOOK FORWARD
TO HEARING FROM YOU.
I'M KATHLEEN PETTY,
GOOD BYE FOR NOW.